## Essential Concepts

- A **frequency** is the number of times a value of the data occurs. A **frequency table** lists the different data and their frequencies. A **relative frequency** is the ratio (i.e., fraction or proportion) of the number of times a value of the data occurs in the set of all outcomes to the total number of outcomes.

- **Visual representations of categorical variables:**
  - **Bar graphs** are visual displays of data in which the frequency of each category listed across the horizontal axis is indicated by the height of its corresponding rectangular bar (or the length if the graph is displayed horizontally).
  - **Pie charts** display data in a round graph, split into “pie pieces,” each representing the proportion of the quantity or frequency it represents. In other words, pie charts display the relative frequencies of your data set.

- A **contingency table** (also called a **two-way table**) displays the results of two categorical variables simultaneously.

- **Comparing a categorical variable across multiple groups:**
  - **Stacked bar charts** display values for different categories but rather than showing a different bar for each category, they display sub-categories as segments within each bar.
  - **Side-by-side bar graphs** present data for two categorical variables from more than one group by creating two bars on the chart for each group—one bar for each variable.

- **Histograms vs. dotplots:**
  - **Histograms** are good choices for displaying data sets that have a large number of observations because they group observations into equal-size “bins.”
  - **Dotplots** display how many individual observations there are of each value observed. Each observation in the data set appears as its own dot on the graph.

- **Features used to describe the distribution of a quantitative variable:**
  - **Shape:** To describe the shape of a distribution, imagine sketching the outline of the data to emphasize the general trend.
    - **Left-skewed:** A cluster of data on the right with a tail of data tapering off to the left.
    - **Symmetric (bell-shaped):** The left and right sides of the distribution closely mirror each other.
    - **Right-skewed:** A cluster of data on the left with a tail of data tapering off to the right.
  - **Number of peaks in the distribution:**
    - **Unimodal:** One prominent peak.
    - **Bimodal:** Two prominent peaks.
    - **Multimodal:** Three or more prominent peaks.
    - **Uniform:** No prominent peaks; data appears evenly distributed.
  - **Center:** The location of the middle of the distribution.
  - **Spread:** A measure of how much the values in a data set tend to differ or vary from one another.
    - **Range:** The difference between the minimum and maximum values in the data.
  - **Outliers:** Observations in the data that are unusual and outside the general pattern of the rest of the observations.

## Key Equations

> \[
> \text{relative frequency} = \frac{\text{subgroup}}{\text{total}}
> \]

## Glossary

**bar graph (bar chart)**  
a graph where categories are represented by bars that are separated from each other  

**bell-shaped**  
the left and right sides of the distribution closely mirror each other  

**bimodal**  
two prominent peaks in the data  

**center**  
the location of the middle of the distribution  

**contingency table (two-way table)**  
a table that displays the results of two categorical variables simultaneously  

**dotplot**  
displays how many individual observations there are of each value observed  

**frequency table**  
lists the number of observations (the frequency) of each unique value of a categorical variable  

**histogram**  
displays data sets that have a large number of observations by grouping into equal-size “bins”  

**multimodal**  
three or more prominent peaks in the data  

**observational units**  
contains information about a group of individuals or things  

**outliers**  
observations in the data that are unusual and outside the general pattern of the rest of the observations  

**pie chart**  
a graph where categories are represented by wedges in a circle, proportional in size to the percentage of individuals or items in each category  

**population**  
a group of people or entities such as animals or objects  

**range**  
the difference between the minimum and maximum values in the data  

**relative frequency**  
represents the proportion of observations in a particular category, expressed as a decimal or percentage  

**sample**  
a group of individuals or entities on which data is collected  

**shape**  
overall patterns and the number of peaks in the data  

**side-by-side bar chart, stacked bar chart**  
an extension of a bar chart that allows comparison between multiple data sets  

**skewed-left**  
a cluster of data on the right with a tail tapering off to the left  

**skewed-right**  
a cluster of data on the left with a tail tapering off to the right  

**spread (variance)**  
a measure of how much values in a data set differ from one another  

**uniform**  
no prominent peaks in the data  

**unimodal**  
one prominent peak in the data  

**variables**  
recorded observations for each unit in the study  